FIPPA INTERNATIONAL FEDERA TION of PITCH and P UTTThe Rules of Pitch and Putt

The Rules of Pitch & Putt  www.fippa.org The Rules of Pitch &   3THERULES OF PITCH& PUTT  As defined by FIPPA, in consultation with national Pitch & Putt associations worldwide. All FIPPA sanctioned competitions are to take place in accordance with these Rules. FIPPA allows member associations and federations to legislate for the game in their own territory and adapt these rules accordingly for local tournaments. 4thi Edition, effective from 1 April 2020 These are transitional Rules for theperiod 2020-2024 and should be read in conjunction with all updates that are published on the FIPPA website, www.fippa.org Pitch & Putt is an independent amateur sport controlled worldwide by FIPPA, the International Federation of Pitch & Putt. The FIPPA Constitution defines Pitch & Putt with the following characteristics: 1.Distances: (a) Length of hole: Maximum of 90 metres. (b)Length of 18 hole course: Maximum of  1,200 metres. 2.Maximum of three clubs (one of which must be a Putter)  permitted for use. 3.Use of a Tee on the Teeing Area is obligatory. 4.The Teeing Area for the hole to be played is common for  all players.

3 The Rules of Pitch & Putt  E d ite d by the R u le s Com m i ttees of FI PPA  FI PPA General Secretariat D ip u ta ció , 274 08009 B a rce lo n a 1st Edi ti on, January 2008 2nd Edition, January 2010 3rd Edi ti on, June 2014 4thE d itio n , A p ril 2 0 2 0 D .L . B-11. 452-2010

4 The Rules of Pitch & Putt  The Rules of Pitch &  4th Edition, April 20205CONTENTS  Page How to use these Rules 6 Etiquette - Behaviour on the Course 7 Definitions 8 Part I General Play 15 Part II Equipment 21 Part III The Game 22 Part IV The Player 27 Part V General Rule 29 Part VI Local Rules 29 P art VII Forms of Play 31

5 The Rules of Pitch & Putt  The Rules of Pitch &   6 HOW TOUSE THESE RULES  It is recommended that you familiarise yourself with these Rules and use them whenever a question arises. If in doubt, play the course as you find it and play the ballas it lies. Understand the Words These Rules are written in a very precise and deliberate fashion. You should be aware of and understand the following differences in word use: may = optional should = recommendation must / shall = instruction (and penalty ifnot complied with)  the ball = means that the ball may not be exchanged foranother  a ball = means that a ball may be exchanged foranother Know the Definitions A good knowledge of the defined terms is very important for the  correct application of the rules. Penalties for breach of rules or noncompliance with procedure  The penalty for a breach of a rule both in Stroke Play and Match  Play competitions is ONE STROKE except when otherwise provided.

6 The Rules of Pitch & Putt  The Rules of Pitch &  4th Edition, April 20207ETIQUETTE - BEHAVIOUR ON THE COURSE  No one should move, talk or stand close to the line of play or directly behind the ball or the hole when a player is addressing the ball or making a stroke. No player should play until the players in front are out of range. Nevertheless, players should play without undue delay. When the play of a hole has been completed, players should imme diately leave the putting green and mark their cards at the next tee. Players should repair their divot holes and pitch mark damage to the putting green. Players should avoid damaging the hole when removing or replacing the flagstick or removing the ball from the hole. The head of a club should not be used to remove the ball from the hole, nor should players lean on their clubs while on the putting green. Before leaving a bunker, players should smooth over all footprints and holes. A serious breach of etiquette or continuous disregard of these guide- lines could result in a player being disqualified. Dress code recommendation It is recommended that players wear clothing appropriate to the practice of Pitch & Putt, avoiding tee shirts without a collar or men’s sleeveless shirts, tracksuits, or shirts of other sports or with symbols alien toour sport or inappropriate footwear such as sandals.

7 The Rules of Pitch & Putt  The Rules of Pitch &  , DEFINITIONS  ABNORMAL GROUND CONDITIONS An “abnormal ground condition” is any casual water, ground under repair or unusual damage to the ground surface caused by animals , vehicles or persons. ADVICE ‘Advice’ is any counsel or suggestion that could influence a player in determining his or her play or method of making a stroke. Information on the rules and matters of public information is not advice. BALL IN PLAY A ball is “in play” as soon as the player has made a stroke on the teeing area . It remains in play (as the player’s ball) until holed out, except when it is out of bounds, lost or lifted or another ball has been substituted in accordance with these rules. A ballso substituted becomes the ballin play. BALL LOST A ball is deemed ‘lost’ on the course a.if it isnot found or identified as his or hers within three minutes after the player’s side have begun to search for it; or b.the player has made a stroke with a substituted ball under the rules with the corresponding loss of distance and one stroke penalty. BALL MOVED A ball is deemed to have ‘moved’ if it leaves its original position even if only bya fraction of its circumference.

8 The Rules of Pitch & Putt  The Rules of Pitch &   9BUNKER A ‘bunker’ is an area of ground where turf or soil has been replaced with sand or the like. A wall or lip of the bunker not covered with grass is part of the bunker. The margin of the bunker extends vertically downwards, but not upwards. A ball is in a bunker when it lies in or any part of ittouches the bunker. CADDIEA ‘caddie’ is one who assists the player in accordance with the rules which includes carrying the player’s clubs and the offering of advice to his or her player. COMMITTEE The ‘committee’ is the duly nominated committee of the club or association organizing the competition. The committee has no power  to waive a rule of Pitch & Putt. The committee may establish Local Rules consistent with the Rules of Pitch & Putt. COURSE The ‘course’ is the whole area within which play is permitted. EQUIPMENT ‘Equipment’ is anything used, worn or carried by the player or playing partner or any of his or her caddies . FLAGSTICKThe ‘flagstick’ is a movable straight indicator placed in the centre of the hole to show its position. GENERAL AREAThe “general area ” is the whole areaof the course except: a.The teeing area and putting green of the hole  being played. b.All bunkers and penalty areas .

The Rules of Pitch & Putt  The Rules of Pitch &  ,4th Edition, April 202012GROUND UNDER REPAIR “Ground Under Repair” is any portion of the course so marked by order of the committee concerned or so declared by its authorised representative. Any grass, bush, tree or anything growing within the ground under repair is part of the ground under repair. It includes material piled for removal and a hole made by a green-keeper, even if not so marked. Stakes and lines defining “ground under repair” are within such ground. Such stakes are obstructions. A ball is in ground under repair when it lies in or any part of it touches the ground under repair. The margin of ground under repair extends vertically downwards, but not upwards. The committee may make a Local Rule prohibiting play from ground under repair. HOLE The ‘hole’ must be 108 mm in diameter and at least 101.6 mm deep. If a lining is used, it must be sunk at least 25.4 mm below the putting surface unless the nature of the soil makes it impracticable to do so. HOLEDA ball is ‘holed’ when it is at rest within the circumference of the hole and allof it isbelow the level of the lipof the hole. LINE OF PLAY The “line of play” is the direction that the player wishes his or her ball to take  after a stroke, plus a reasonable distance oneither side of the intended direction. The line of play extends vertically upwards from the ground, but does not extend beyond the hole. LOOSE IMPEDIMENTS The term “loose impediments” denotes natural objects notfixed or growing and not adhering to the ball, and includes stones not solidly embedded, leaves, twigs, branches and the like, dung, worms, in- sects and casts or heaps made by them. Sand and loose soilare loose impediments on the putting green and the “general area”. Dew and frost arenot loose impediments.

The Rules of Pitch & Putt  The Rules of Pitch &   11MARKER A ‘marker’ is one who is appointed by the committee to record a competitor’s score in stroke play. He or she is not a referee. NEAREST POINT OF RELIEF The “nearest point of relief” is the point on the course, nearest to where the ball lies, which is not nearer the hole, and where the interference from which relief is permitted no longer exists. OBSTRUCTIONS An ‘obstruction’ is anything artificial, whether erected, placed or left on the course except: a.Objects defining out of bounds such as walls, fences, stakes  and railings. b.Any obstruction declared by the committee to be an  integral part of the course. c.Any part of an immovable artificial object that is out of  bounds. An obstruction is a movable obstruction if it can be moved without unreasonable effort, without unduly delaying play and without causing damage. Otherwise, it is an immovable obstruction . OUT OF BOUNDS “Out of bounds” is defined by all boundary edges of the course and play outside these boundaries is prohibited. The committee may define and mark areas within the course as out of bounds. A ball is out of bounds when all of it lies out of bounds. A player may stand out of bounds to play a ball lying within bounds. Objects defining out of bounds are not obstructions and are deemed to be fixed. The out of bounds line extends vertically upwards and downwards. OUTSIDE INFLUENCE An “outside influence” is any person or thing not part of the match or, in stroke play, not part of the competitor’s side. Neither wind nor water is an outside influence.

 11 The Rules of Pitch & Putt  The Rules of Pitch &  ,4th Edition, April 202012PARTNER A ‘partner’ is a player associated with another player on the same side. PENALTY AREA An area from which relief with a one-stroke penalty is allowed if the player’s ball comes to rest there. A “penalty area” is any sea, lake, pond, river, ditch, surface drainage ditch or other open water course (whether containing water or not). “Penalty areas” could be other areas defined by the Committee where a ball is often lost or unable to be played.All ground or water within the margin of a “penalty area” is part of the “penalty area”. If the margin of the “penalty area” is not otherwise defined, it shall be where the downward depression of the ground commences. The margin of a “penalty area” extends vertically upwards and downwards. Stakes identifying “penalty areas” and lines, beams, stones, walls, fences etc. defining the margins of “penalty areas” are in the “penalty areas” and are deemed to be obstructions. The margin of such “penalty areas” are defined as the exterior points of the objects marking the “penalty area”. Stakes to identify and/or lines used to define penalty areas should bered.  PENALTY STROKE A “penalty stroke” is one added to the score of a player or player’s side under the rules. PRACTICE ‘Practice’ is defined as the deliberate striking of a ball in a manner the player may wish to replicate in the course of normal play. PRACTICE SWING A “practice swing” is not a practice stroke and may be taken at any place, provided the player does not breach the Rules.

The Rules of Pitch &   13PROVISIONAL BALL A “provisional ball” is a ball played under these rules in place of a ball which may be lost outside a penalty area or may be out of bounds. PUTTING GREEN The “putting green” is the area of the hole being played which is specially prepared for putting. A ball is on the putting green when anypart of ittouches the putting green. REFEREE A ‘referee’ is one who is appointed by the Committee to accompany players to decide questions of fact and apply the rules. H e o r s h e must act onany breach of a Rule that h e o r s h e observes o r i s reported to him or her. The referee’s decision is final. RELIEF AREA Is the area where a player must drop a ball when taking relief under a Rule. The size of relief area is either one or two club-lengths measured from the reference point and it is not nearer the hole than the reference point. STANCE Theposition of player’s feet and body preparatory to making a stroke. STIPULATED ROUND The “stipulated round” consists of playing the holes of the course in their correct sequence unless otherwise authorised by the Committee. STROKE A ‘stroke’ is the forward movement of the club made with the intention of striking at and moving the ball. A stroke shall be counted as soon as the downswing commences. But if a player checks his or her downswing voluntarily before the club head reaches the ball he or she is deemed not to have made a stroke.

 12 The Rules of Pitch & Putt  The Rules of Pitch &   13PROVISIONAL BALL A “provisional ball” is a ball played under these rules in place of a ball which may be lost outside a penalty area or may be out of bounds. PUTTING GREEN The “putting green” is the area of the hole being played which is specially prepared for putting. A ball is on the putting green when anypart of ittouches the putting green. REFEREE A ‘referee’ is one who is appointed by the Committee to accompany players to decide questions of fact and apply the rules. H e o r s h e must act onany breach of a Rule that h e o r s h e observes o r i s reported to him or her. The referee’s decision is final. RELIEF AREA Is the area where a player must drop a ball when taking relief under a Rule. The size of relief area is either one or two club-lengths measured from the reference point and it is not nearer the hole than the reference point. STANCE Theposition of player’s feet and body preparatory to making a stroke. STIPULATED ROUND The “stipulated round” consists of playing the holes of the course in their correct sequence unless otherwise authorised by the Committee. STROKE A ‘stroke’ is the forward movement of the club made with the intention of striking at and moving the ball. A stroke shall be counted as soon as the downswing commences. But if a player checks his or her downswing voluntarily before the club head reaches the ball he or she is deemed not to have made a stroke.

 13 The Rules of Pitch & Putt  The Rules of Pitch &  ,4th Edition, April 202012TEE A ‘tee’ is an artificial device, designed to raise the ball off the ground. The minimum height requirement of the device is 5mm. TEEING AREA The “teeing area” is the starting place for the hole to be played and is common to all players. If the starting place is a mat, the defined area of the “teeing area” is the mat itself. Otherwise, the front and sides must be defined and the back of the teeing area shall be no more than two clublengths from the front. TEMPORARY WATER Any temporary accumulation of water or snow or natural iceon the  course that is not in a penalty area and that can be seen before or after the player takes a “stance” . WRONG BALL “Wrong Ball” is any ball other than the player’s ball in play or his or her provisional ball. WRONG PUTTING GREEN A “wrong putting green” is any putting green other than that of the hole being played.

The Rules of Pitch & Putt  The Rules of Pitch &  ,4th Edition, April 202012TEE A ‘tee’ is an artificial device, designed to raise the ball off the ground. The minimum height requirement of the device is 5mm. TEEING AREA The “teeing area” is the starting place for the hole to be played and is common to all players. If the starting place is a mat, the defined area of the “teeing area” is the mat itself. Otherwise, the front and sides must be defined and the back of the teeing area shall be no more than two clublengths from the front. TEMPORARY WATER Any temporary accumulation of water or snow or natural iceon the  course that is not in a penalty area and that can be seen before or after the player takes a “stance” . WRONG BALL “Wrong Ball” is any ball other than the player’s ball in play or his or her provisional ball. WRONG PUTTING GREEN A “wrong putting green” is any putting green other than that of the hole being played.

The Rules of Pitch &   15  PARTI - GENERAL PLAY  ARTI- GENERAL PLAY  1.THE GAME a.The game of Pitch & Putt consists of playing a ball with a club from each Teeing Area into the associated target hole by a stroke or successive strokes in accordance with these Rules. b.Except as otherwise allowed by the Committee the holes must be played in sequence, commencing at the first hole. c.The ball shall be played as it lies, except as otherwise pro- vided in the rules. PENALTY: disquali fication 2.PRACTICE On any day or days of a competition, or during the course of any format of competition itself, players must not practice within the boundaries of the course. This rule is valid both for Matchplay and Stroke play competitions. PENALTY: disquali fication Between the play of two holes a player must not make a practice stroke, except on the putting green of the last hole played, provided he or she does not unduly delay play. PENALTY: one stroke Play in a different competition on the same day(s) does not consti tute practice. Practice on a designated practice range and practice putting green prior to commencement of any round is permitted. Strokes played in continuing the play of a hole, the result of which has been decided, are not practice strokes.

15 The Rules of Pitch & Putt  The Rules of Pitch &  4thd Edition, April 2020 163.OBSTRUCTIONS Any movable obstruction may be removed anywhere on or off the course without penalty . a.If the ball moves, caused by the removal of the obstruction, it must be replaced. b.If the ball lies in or on the obstruction, the ball may be lifted and the obstruction removed. The ball must be dropped, or on the putting green be placed, as near as possible to the spot under the place where the ball lay in or on the obstruction, but not nearer the hole. c.Except when the ball is in a “penalty area” , a player may obtain relief when aball comes to reston or near an immovable obstruction so as to interfere with a player’s stance or s w i n g . O n l y w h e n t h e b a l l i s o n t h e “ p u t t i n g green”, interference exists when an immovable obstruction intervenes on the “line of play”. Procedure: •General area , lift the ball and drop without penalty within one club-length of the nearest point of relief - but not nearer the hole (relief area). •Bunker , lift the ball and drop in the bunker without penalty as above. •Putting Green, liftthe ball and place itwithout penalty at the nearest point of relief. PENALTY FOR BREACH OF RULE 3b: one stroke

16 The Rules of Pitch & Putt   17The Rules of Pitch &  4.ABNORMAL GROUND CONDITIONS Except when the ball is in a “penalty area” , a player may obtain free relief when aball lies in ortouches an “abnormal ground condition” orwhen such a condition interferes with the player’s stance or swing .Only when the ball is on the “putting green”, interference exists when an “abnormal ground condition” intervenes on the “line of play”. Procedure: a.General area , lift the ball and drop without penalty within one club-length of the nearest point of relief - but not nearer the hole (relief area). b.Bunker, lift the ball and drop in the bunker without penalty as above. c.Putting Green, liftthe ball and place itwithout penalty at the nearest point of relief. PENALTY: one stroke 5.SAND BUNKERS Before making a stroke atthe ballin a sand bunker the player : a. May remove loose impediments and movable obstructions. b. Is prohibited only from touching the sand:  1. with the hand or club to test the condition of the bunker. 2. with the club in the area right behind or in front of the  ball.3. when making a practice swing or the backswing for a  stroke. PENALTY: one stroke

17 The Rules of Pitch & Putt  The Rules of Pitch &  4thd Edition, April 2020 186.PENALTY AREAS A ball in a “penalty area” may be played as it lies without penalty. A loose impediment and movable obstruction may be removed. If a ball is in or is lost in a “penalty area”, the player may under penalty of one stroke: •Play a ballfrom where the original ball was last played (see stroke and distance relief) •Drop a ball within a one club-length relief area behind the “penalty area”, keeping the point at which the original ball last crossed the margin of the “penalty area” directly b e t w e e n t h e h o l e a n d t h e s p o t f r o m w h i c h t h e b a l l i s dropped, with no limit to how far behind the “penalty area” the ball may be dropped. •Drop a ball outside the “penalty area” within two club- lengths relief area of and not nearer the hole than the point where the original ball last crossed t h e m a r g i n o f t h e “penalty area” . PENALTY: one stroke 7.THE TEEING AREA a.The ball must be played off the defined teeing area or mat by placing it on a tee. b.I f a p l a y e r , w h e n s t a r t i n g a h o l e , p l a y s a b a l l f r o m wrongteeing area or outside the teeing area/mat , he or she shall incur a penalty of one stroke. If the player does not correct the mistake before making a stroke to begin another hole he or she is disqualified . If the ball falls off the tee or is knocked off by the player while addressing it, it shall be re-teed without penalty. If a  stroke is made at the ball in these circumstances, the  stroke shall be counted and the ballplayed as it lies. PENALTY: one stroke

18 The Rules of Pitch & Putt  The Rules of Pitch &  4thd Edition, April 2020 198.THE PUTTING GREEN a.A ball on the putting green may be marked, lifted, cleaned and replaced. b.on the putting green: •A loose impediment may be removed by picking it up or by brushing it aside provided that nothing is pressed down on the line of play. c.A player may repair damage on the putting green without penalty by taking reasonable actions to restore the putting green as nearly as possible to its original condition.  d.Ifthemarke rinterfere swiththe lineofplayofanopponent , if sorequeste d itshoul d beplace d oneor moreclub head(s ) lengt hto eithe rside o fitsorigina l position. I f themarke ris soplace dtoeithe r side , itmust bereplace dinits origina lpositio nbefor e the ball is replaced. e.If a player’s ball, when played on the putting green, strikes another ball also on the putting green, the player shall incur a one stroke penalty and his or her ball is played as it lies. The moved ball must be replaced in the original position. f. ‘Flagstick’. There is no penalty if the player’s ball strikes the ‘flagstick’ either placed in the hole or having been removed from the hole. g.“Wrong putting green”. A ball lying on a putting green other than that of the hole being played must belifted and dropped without penalty within one club-length of the nearest point of relief - but not nearer the hole. h.When any part of a ball overhangs the edge of a hole, the owner of the ball may wait 10 seconds to determine whether it is at rest. If by then the ball has not fallen in the hole, it is deemed tobe at rest and shall be played accordingly. i.If any old hole plug interferes with the line of play then the

19 The Rules of Pitch & Putt  The Rules of Pitch &  20 4th Edition, April 2020ball may be marked, lifted and placed at the nearest point of relief, no nearer the hole, without penalty. j. Pointing Out Line of Play for Ball on Putting green. Before the stroke is made, only the player and his or her caddie may point out the player’s line of play, but with these limitations:  • The player or caddie may touch the putting green with a hand, foot or anything he or she is holding, butmust not improve the conditions affecting the stroke.• The player or caddie must not set an object down anywhere on or off the putting green to show the line of play. This is not allowed even if that object is removed before the stroke is made. • W h i l e t h e s t r o k e i s b e i n g m a d e , t h e c a d d i e m u s t n o t deliberately stand in a location on or close to the player’s line o f p l a y o r d o a n y t h i n g e l s e ( s u c h a s p o i n t i n g o u t a s p o t o r creating a shadow on the putting green) to point out the line of play.  Exception – Caddie Attending Flagstick: The caddie may stand in a location on or close to the player’s line of play to attendthe flagstick. PENALTY: one stroke. k.N o c l u b e x c e p t a p u t t e r m a y b e u s e d o n a p u t t i n g g r e e n e x c e p t i f d u r i n g t h e n o r m a l c o u r s e o f p l a y t h e club is damaged. The player may finish the stipulated round with either of his or her other clubs, or substitute the putter for another without causing undue delay. PENALTY FOR BREACH OF RULE 8 k: one stroke 9.SUSPENSION OF PLAY A player may not discontinue play unless authorised or if play is suspended for allby the Committee. Competitors playing a hole when play is suspended may only continue play of that hole but only if feasible without delay.

20 The Rules of Pitch & Putt  The Rules of Pitch &  4thd Edition, April 2020 21PARTII - EQUIPMENT  TII - EQUIPMENT  10.CLUBS a. A player shall have a maximum of three clubs  (conforming to recognized speci fications), one of which must be a putter. b. Foreign material must not be applied to the club face. c. A damaged club during a round may be replaced, without  causing undue delay, only when the player did not cause the damage. The replacement must not be made by  borrowing any club which another player playing on the course has selected forplay. No matter what the nature or cause of the damage the player may continue to make strokes with the damaged club. d. Partners may share clubs, provided that the total  number of clubs does not exceed three. PENALTY FOR BREACH OF RULE 11 a / d: one stroke for each hole with a maximum penalty ofthree strokes per round PENALTY FOR BREACH OF RULE 11 b / c: disquali fication 11.THE BALL a.The ball shall not be less than 1.68 inches (42.67mm) and must conform to recognised specifications. b.A ball must have the manufacturer’s name and Identi fication number or brand clearly legible. c.Foreign material must not be applied to a ball or otherwise manipulated. PENALTY: disquali fication d.If a player’s ball breaks into pieces as a result of a stroke, the stroke is cancelled and the player must play another ball without penalty as nearly as possible at the spot from which the original ball was played. A ball cut or cracked, while playing hole, may be substitutedby another ball.

21 The Rules of Pitch & Putt  The Rules of Pitch &  4thd Edition, April 2020 24PART III - THE GAME PART III - THE GAME 12. PLAYING THE BALL a.The ball must be fairly struck at with the head of the club and must not be pushed, scooped, scraped or spooned. b.The first player to play from the first “teeing area” is decided by the order of the draw (e.g.: order ofhandicap); if there is no draw, by lots. Thereafter the side with the lowest score on the previous hole will play first at the next “teeing area” . c.Before commencing play (or when the ball is changed), each player should clearly identify the player’s ball to their marker/opponent. d.When the balls are in play, the ball furthest from the hole should be played first. e.A player must hole out with theball played from the teeing area unless a rule permits him to substitute another ball (a ball damaged, lost or irrecoverable). f.If a player’s club accidentally strikes the ball more than once, there has been only one “stroke” a n d t h e r e i s n o penalty. g.A player shall not improve, or allow to be improved, the player’s line of play or the lie of the ball and shall not move, bend or break anything fixed or growing, except as may occur in the course of fairly taking up the player’s stance. h.W i t h o u t p e n a l t y , a p l a y e r m a y r e m o v e a “ l o o s e impediment” anywhere on or off the course. If a player’s removal of a “loose impediment” causes the ball to move, anywhere except on the putting green, the player incurs one penalty stroke .The ball must be replaced on its original spot. i.When a player’s ball lies in a part of the general area cut to f a i r w a y h e i g h t o r l e s s , t h e p l a y e r m a y r e p a i r p i t c h m a r k damage, without penalty. j.A ball embedded in its own pitch mark in the general area may be lifted, cleaned and dropped without penalty,  22The Rules of Pitch & Putt  The Rules of Pitch &   23within one club-length of the spot where it lay but not nearer the hole (relief area). Relief is not allowed when the ball is embedded in sand in a part of the general area that is not cut to fairway height or less. A player may clean his or herball without penalty during play of a hole if the ballhas been marked and lifted on the putting green orwhen plugged or otherwise, in accordance with these Rules. k.A player may not clean his or her ball if the ball has been marked and lifted because it is assisting or interfering (off the putting green) with play or other than to the extent necessary. A ball may be cleaned for identification or to determine if it is unfit for play. l.I f t h e p o s i t i o n o f a b a l l , i n a n y p l a c e o n t h e c o u r s e, interferes with the stance, swingor line of play of a nother player, the ball must be mark ed and lifted if so requested andsubsequentlyreplaced . The ball sha ll not be clea ned. m. A player, playing from a wrong teeing area/mat, s h a l l c a n c e l t h e s h o t ( s ) p l a y e d a n d m u s t p l a y f r o m t h e correct teeing area / mat. The player shall incur a penalty of one stroke. Should the error not be rectified before play of the next hole commences, he or she is disqualified. n.If a p layer plays a stroke/s with a wrong ball, the player shall incur a penalty of one stroke, and then play his or her own ball. Should the error not be rectified before play of the next hole commences, the player shall be disqualified. Shots played with a wrong ball arenot to be counted. o.If a ball, having been struck, is known to have gone out of bounds or to be lost, the player shall add a one stroke penalty and must play aballfrom where the original ball was last played: •from the teeing area / mat the use of a tee is obligatory. •from general area, penalty area or bunker the ball must be dropped within one-club length relief area. •from the putting green the ballmust be placed.  23The Rules of Pitch & Putt  The Rules of Pitch &  4thd Edition, April 2020 24p.A Provisional Ball should be played if the player considers the original ball may be lost outside a penalty area or out of bounds and has so declared to the marker/oppo nent and identified the provisional ball to that person. If the original ball is in fact lost or out of bounds, the provisional ball becomes the ball in play and the player adds one penalty stroke to the score. If the original ball is neither lost nor out of bounds, the provisional ball must be abandoned, without penalty, and the strokes played with it shall not count. Failure to so abandon the provisional ball constitutes playing with the wrong ball. q.The player may deem his or her ball unplayable at any place on the course, except when the ball is in a penalty area . The player is the sole judge a sto whether the ball is unplayable. If the ball is deemed to be unplayable, the player may, under penalty of one stroke: i)play a ball from where the original ballwas last played : •from the teeing area / mat the use of a tee is  obligatory. •from general area or penalty area the ball must  be dropped within one-club length relief area. •on the putting green the ballmust be placed. ii)drop a ball within one club-length relief area behind the point where the ball lay, keeping that point directly between the hole and the spot from which theball is dropped, with no limit to how far behind that point the ball may be dropped; or iii)drop a ball within two club-lengths relief area of the spot where the balllay, but not nearer the hole. If the unplayable ball is in a bunker, the player may proceed under clause i),ii)or iii).If playing under clause ii) or iii),a ball must be dropped in the bunker. PENALTY: one stroke.

24 The Rules of Pitch & Putt  The Rules of Pitch &   2513.BALL MOVED, DEFLECTED OR STOPPED a.When a player’s ballin play and atrest is moved by the player, his or her partner or their equipment, the player shall incur a one stroke penalty and theballmust be replaced. T h e r e i s n o p e n a l t y i f t h e p l a y e r ’ s b a l l i s accidentally moved by the player, opponent or anyone else while trying to find or identify it. If this happens, the ball must be replaced on its original spot. There is no penalty if the player, opponent or anyone else accidentally moves the player’s ball or ball-marker on the putting green. b.If a ball in play and at rest, moves after the player has b e g u n t h e s t r o k e o r t h e b a c k s w i n g f o r a s t r o k e , the player shall be deemed to have caused it to move and shall incur a one stroke penalty. The ball must be replaced. But if the player goes on to make the stroke the ball must not be replaced. c.If a ball at rest is moved by an outside influence , including another player in stroke play or another ball, the ball must be replaced without penalty. d.If natural forces (such as wind or water) cause a player’s ball at rest to move, the ball must be played from its new spot. Exception: if the player’s ball or ball marker on the putting green moves after the player had already lifted and replaced the ball on the spot from which it moved, the ball must be replaced on its original spot no matter what caused it to move (including natural forces: wind or water). e.If the ball moves after any loose impediment has been touched by the player or the player’s partner, it shall be replaced, incurring a one stroke penalty, except on the putting g reen where theballmust be replaced without penalty. f.If a ball in motion is accidentally stopped or deflected by any outside influence or person, including players, caddies and equipment , t h e r e i s n o p e n a l t y and the ball shall be played as it lies.

25 The Rules of Pitch & Putt  The Rules of Pitch &   26g.If a ball in motion is deliberately stopped or deflected by the player or the player’s partner, or their equipment, a penalty of one stroke is incurred and the ball must be played as it lies. h.A player must not take any action to influence the position or the movement of a ball except in accordance with the Rules. A removed flagstick, a ball at rest on the putting green and the player’s equipment may be lifted or removed. 14.RELIEF SITUATIONS a.Relief Area: is the area where a player must drop a ball when taking relief under a Rule. The size of relief area is e i t h e r o n e o r t w o c l u b - l e n g t h s , m e a s u r e d f r o m t h e reference point, and it is not nearer the hole than the reference point.  b.Dropping Ball in Relief Area : a ball to be dropped under the Rules shall be dropped by the player in person. The player may use any ball. The player must let go of the ball from a location at knee height without touching player or equipment. The ball must be dropped in the relief area and must come to rest in relief area.  c.A dropped ballmust be re-dropped, without penalty, if the ball comes to rest outside the relief area. If the ball when re- dropped alsocomes to rest outside the relief area, it must be placed as near as possible to the spot where ittouched the  ground when re-dropped. d.Stroke and Distance : at any time, a player may take stroke  and distance relief by adding one penalty stroke and playing a ball from where the previous stroke was made: •From the teeing area / mat the use of a tee is obligatory. •From general area, penalty area or bunker the ball must  be dropped within one-club length relief area. •On the putting green the ball must be placed.

26 The Rules of Pitch & Putt  The Rules of Pitch &   27PART IV – THE PLAYER  IV - TH PLAYER  15. THE PLAYER'S RESPONSIBILITIES a.The player shall start atthe time laid down by the committee. b.The players shall remain during the round in the group arranged by the committee. c.The use of a caddie and a distance measuring device is permitted unless the Committee determines otherwise. d.The player isresponsible forthe correctness of the score recorded for each hole on his or her card. After completion of the round, the player must ensure that both he and his marker/she and her marker (one who records the player’s score) sign the score card and return it to the committee as soon as possible. e.Agreement to waive Rules: Players must not agree to exclude the application of any rule orto waive any penalty incurred. PENALTY: disqualification. f.If a player returns a score for any hole lower than actually played, or fails to record a score for any hole, the player shall be disqualified. A score higher than actually played shall stand. g.A player must not give / ask for advice, except to / of the player’s partner or his or her own caddie. In team events, the Committee may designate a representative of the team authorised to offer players of thatteam advice. PENALTY: one stroke h.Players of the same group should hand in their 

27 The Rules of Pitch & Putt  The Rules of Pitch &   26scorecards to the competition organization  simultaneously.

28 The Rules of Pitch & Putt  The Rules of Pitch &   29  PART V - GENERAL RULE  RT V - GENERAL RULE  Where these rules do not provide for a specific situation, or if any point in dispute is not covered by the Rules, the Committee should, upon deliberation, make a decision in accordance with equity. PART V I- LOCAL RULES  Winter Rule : The Committee may make the following Local Rule ( w i n t e r r u l e ) f o r a b n o r m a l c o n d i t i o n s o n t h e c o u r s e t h a t m i g h t interfere with course protection and fair and pleasant play: When a player’s ball lies in a part of the general area cut to fairway h e i g h t o r l e s s , t h e p l a y e r m a y t a k e f r e e r e l i e f b y m a r k i n g i t s position, lifting, cleaning and placing a ball in the general area within the distance of 20cm. and not nearer the hole than where it originally lay. The player may place his or her ball only once and it is in play when it has been placed. PENALTY: one stroke Pace of Play : The Committee can put the following Pace of Play  policy into effect: The maximum time allocated per stroke is 30  seconds. Referees will monitor pace of play and decide whether a  group that is out of position should be timed. An individual player  may be timed instead of the entire group.

29 The Rules of Pitch & Putt  The Rules of Pitch &   28The timing will start when a player has had sufficient time to reach  the ball, it is his or her turn and he or she is able to play without  interference or distraction. PENALTY: Penalty for first breach: verbal warning from referee. Penalty for second breach: One stroke penalty.Penalty for third breach: Disqualification.

30 The Rules of Pitch & Putt  The Rules of Pitch &   31PART VII - FORMS OF PLAY  MATCH PLAY -A match consists of one side playing against another over a stipulated round unless otherwise decreed by the committee. -In match play the game is played by holes. A hole is won by the side that holes its ball with fewer strokes. In a handicap match the lower net score wins the hole. -A hole is halved if each side holes out in the same number of strokes. -A match is won when one side leads by a number of holes greater than the number of holes remaining to be played. -A player may concede an opponent’s next stroke at any time provided the opponent’s ball is at rest. The opponent is considered t o have holed out with the next stroke and the ball may be removed by either side. -A player may concede a hole at any time prior to the start or conclusion of that hole. -A player may concede a match at any time prior to the start or conclusion of that match. Forms of Match play: Single Match Play A match in which one player plays against another. Four Ball Match Play A match in which two players play their better ball against the bet- ter ballof two other players.

31 The Rules of Pitch & Putt  The Rules of Pitch &   28Foursome Match Play A match in which two players playing as partners against two other players, and each side plays with one ball. The partners must play alternately from the teeing areas /mats and alternately during the play of each hole. STROKE PLAY -A Stroke Play competition consists of playing a stipulated  round unless otherwise decreed by the committee. -The competitor or side playing the stipulated round or  rounds in the fewest strokes is the winner. In a handicap  competition, the competitor or side with the lowest net  score forthe stipulated round or rounds is the winner. Forms of Stroke play: Single Stroke Play A Stroke Play competition in which each player plays against the other competitors. Four Ball Stroke Play A Stroke Play competition in which two players, playing as partners, score with their better ball. Foursome Stroke Play A Stroke Play competition in which two players, playing as partners, play with one ball. The partners must play alternately from the tee- ing grounds/mats and alternately during the play of each hole. Stableford competitions A Stableford competition is a form of Stroke Play. The scoring in such a competition is made by points awarded in relation to a fixed score at each hole.The Rules of Pitch &   33Hole played in……………………………………………….............…… points More than one over fixed score or no score returned . …..............0  One over fixed score………………………… …………………… ........................................ 1 Fixed score ……………………………………………………… ........................ 2 One under fixed score ………………………………………… ...................... 3 Twounder fixed score ………………………………………… ..................... 4 Three under fixed score ……………………………………… ..................... 5 Four under fixed score …………………………………… ......................... 6 The winner is the competitor who scores the highest number of points. The marker is responsible for marking only the gross number of strokes at each hole where the competitor’s net score earns one or more points.

32 The Rules of Pitch & Putt The Rules of Pitch &   33Hole played in……………………………………………….............…… points More than one over fixed score or no score returned . …..............0  One over fixed score………………………… …………………… ........................................ 1 Fixed score ……………………………………………………… ........................ 2 One under fixed score ………………………………………… ...................... 3 Twounder fixed score ………………………………………… ..................... 4 Three under fixed score ……………………………………… ..................... 5 Four under fixed score …………………………………… ......................... 6 The winner is the competitor who scores the highest number of points. The marker is responsible for marking only the gross number of strokes at each hole where the competitor’s net score earns one or more points. The Rules of Pitch &   33Hole played in……………………………………………….............…… points More than one over fixed score or no score returned . …..............0  One over fixed score………………………… …………………… ........................................ 1 Fixed score ……………………………………………………… ........................ 2 One under fixed score ………………………………………… ...................... 3 Twounder fixed score ………………………………………… ..................... 4 Three under fixed score ……………………………………… ..................... 5 Four under fixed score …………………………………… ......................... 6 The winner is the competitor who scores the highest number of points. The marker is responsible for marking only the gross number of strokes at each hole where the competitor’s net score earns one or more points.

33 The Rules of Pitch & Putt The Rules of Pitch &   33Hole played in……………………………………………….............…… points More than one over fixed score or no score returned . …..............0  One over fixed score………………………… …………………… ........................................ 1 Fixed score ……………………………………………………… ........................ 2 One under fixed score ………………………………………… ...................... 3 Twounder fixed score ………………………………………… ..................... 4 Three under fixed score ……………………………………… ..................... 5 Four under fixed score …………………………………… ......................... 6 The winner is the competitor who scores the highest number of points. The marker is responsible for marking only the gross number of strokes at each hole where the competitor’s net score earns one or more points.

The Rules of Pitch & Putt 

The Rules of Pitch & Putt  www.fippa.org

The Rules of Pitch & Putt  www.fippa.orgFIPPA INTERNATIONAL FEDERA TION of PITCH and PUTT